---
title: "July 2018 – Aging obscure triplets"
collection: recmath
permalink: /recmath/2018-07-ponder
---
### Status: Solved in time, no bonus '&#42;'

[Link to problem page](https://research.ibm.com/haifa/ponderthis/challenges/July2018.html){:target="_blank"}

### Problem Statement

We're looking for triplets of numbers $(a,b,c)$, where $a,b,c \in \mathbb{N}$. A triplet is said to be $\textit{obscure}$ if both its sum $(a+b+c)$ and product $(a \cdot b \cdot c)$ are found in at least one other triple, for example as in $(2,8,9)$ and $(3,4,12)$. Let's define a $\textit{consecutive triplet}$ as follows:

$$
\begin{aligned}
\text{The triplet } (a,b,c) \text{ has a consecutive triplet given by } (a+1,b+1,c+1). 
\end{aligned}
$$

Our solution must be an obscure triplet, whose $\textit{three}$ consecutive triplets are also obscure. Earning the '&#42;' will require an obscure triplet whose $\textit{five}$ consecutive triplets are also obscure.

### The Search

We start off as usual with a brute force search, and hope that our solution lies within our computational abilities. As discussed in [this excellent blog post by "srcmake,"](https://www.srcmake.com/home/ponderthisjuly2018){:target="_blank"}, ones choice of data structure is essential, at least if one hopes to earn a '&#42;'. When I first solved this problem in 2018, I seem to remember using arrays and a labyrinth of nested for loops, but now I'd approach this problem with a dictionary.

We fix an upper limit $n$ on our largest triplet element, and iterate combinatorically through the triplet space $(a,b,c) \in \\{1, 2, \dots n\\}^3$. Initially, I used a dictionary, whose keys were tuples storing the triplet sum and triplet product, and whose values were the frequency of that combination. From our example earlier, after iterating through those two triplets my dictionary would have the entry ```freq_dict[(19,144)] = 2```, the ```2``` informing us that those triplets are obscure. This method works perfectly well for finding the basic solution, but isn't efficient enough with memory to find a solution worthly of the bonus '&#42;'. Instead, we'll store the sum and product in a string separated by a comma, as in ```freq_dict["19,144"] = 2```.

So, first we iterate through the entire space of triplets, storing all the frequency values in our dictionary along the way. Next, we iterate through the same space again, and perform a series of checks to see if a given triplet satisfies the conditions necessary for our desired solution. The code is short enough to be displayed below:

```
from collections import defaultdict

# Upper limit
n = 66

# Initialize our dictionary
freq_dict = defaultdict(lambda: 0)

# Store our frequency values
for i in range(1,n-1):
  for j in range(i+1,n):
    for k in range(j+1,n+1):
      s = str(i+j+k)+"," + str(i*j*k)
      freq_dict[s] += 1

# Hunt for solutions
for i in range(1,n-1):
  for j in range(i+1,n):
    for k in range(j+1,n+1):
      x1 = str(i+j+k)+"," + str(i*j*k)
      if freq_dict[x1] > 1:
        x2 = str(i+j+k+3)+"," + str((i+1)*(j+1)*(k+1))
        if freq_dict[x2] > 1:
          x3 = str(i+j+k+6)+"," + str((i+2)*(j+2)*(k+2))
          if freq_dict[x3] > 1:
            x4 = str(i+j+k+9)+"," + str((i+3)*(j+3)*(k+3))
            if freq_dict[x4] > 1:
              # Anything printed here is a solution
              print("Three consecutive obscure triplets: ",i,j,k)
              x5 = str(i+j+k+12)+"," + str((i+4)*(j+4)*(k+4))
              if freq_dict[x5] > 1:
                print("Four consecutive obscure triplets: ",i,j,k)
                x5 = str(i+j+k+15)+"," + str((i+5)*(j+5)*(k+5))
                if freq_dict[x5] > 1:
                  # Anything printed here gets us a '*'
                  print("Five consecutive obscure triplets: ",i,j,k)
``` 

Notice that we're saving comparisons by nesting our conditionals rather than checking them simultaneously. A run with $n=66$ is sufficient to find a few solutions, but $n=1058$ is required to find the first '&#42;' triplet. On my current machine, $n=1100$ is about as high as I can go before the program crashes, and you can view the output of this run [here](/files/2018-07-ponder-solutions.txt){:target="_blank"}.

### The Solutions

In 2018, I submitted $(9,21,62)$, which has four consecutive obscure triplets, and was content at having found a solution that went beyond the requirements of the problem. However, it is nice to revisit this problem and at least be able to find $(215,328,1053)$, good for a '&#42;'. It turns out that only three other '&#42;'-worthy triplets were found, requiring runs up to $n=13161$. Be sure to check out some other details about the problem at its [solution page here](https://research.ibm.com/haifa/ponderthis/solutions/July2018.html){:target="_blank"}.
